To understand the discount of cash
flows, or discount of cash
flows, I want to go
deeper into the concept of
discounting or updating,
which we saw in previous classes.
Well, discounting or updating is calculating
the value today, the present value,
the current value of a cash
flow, of a charge, of a payment
that occurs in the periods.
And what we do is bring it to the present
moment to see how much it is worth
today.
As we have seen, we have
to consider the value of
money in time.
One million euros in five years.
How much is it worth today?
We are trying to discount
that million.
And how do we do it?
The formula is this.
The present value or current
value is equal to that cash flow
divided to bring it, to discount
it, to update it, we divide it between
an upgrade or discount factor,
which is equal to one plus
the interest rate raised
to n, which is the number
of periods.
By the way, here I want you to keep
in mind that here we’ve
talked about interest rate I,
but really this is the upgrade
rate or it’s the discount rate.
And sometimes you’ll see it written,
for example, with the letter K, or with the
letter D.
Well, it depends on the context in which
it is used, but I want you to understand it.
It is the upgrade rate, it is the
discount rate we will use to
divide that future cash flow and
bring it to the current moment.
Well, let’s see an example.
We will think that in this case the
discount rate or interest rate
is 10% and that we want to discount
200,000 euros that we will charge,
for example, in this case it
is a charge within three years
and we bring it at the current time.
We use the formula.
We have 200,000 between 1 plus
10% elevated to 3.
Well, in the end we are dividing 200,
000 between 1 by 33.
And from this formula what we get is
that the current value or present
value of those 200,000 euros
when we bring them to date is equal
to 150.263.
So, what does this depend on?
What is the current value of
a future cash flow?
It depends on, as we are seeing in
the formula, the variables are the
discount rate and the number of periods.
What happens if, for example,
we increase the discount rate
and we double the discount rate?
This is a $20,000 discount, but in this
case we will be discounted at 20% instead
of 10%.
Well, as you can see, it is very clear
in the formula because it is in the
denominator.
We are dividing by a larger
amount.
So in this case the current
value, which was 150,000 euros
before, in this case are 115,741.
If we increase the discount
rate, if we discount at a higher
rate, the current value is lower.
It is quite logical.
You probably already know what
it means to update or discount.
We have seen the example with
a single amount.
We calculated what the current
value of 200,000 euros we will receive
within three years and we discounted
them with two discount rates,
which were with 10 and
20%.
Well, the discount of cash
flows is ultimately the same.
What happens is that in this case
we will apply it to a series
of cash flows or a series of cash
flows, but we will do the same.
We will bring them all to the current
moment and we will calculate the current
value or present value of that flow
of Today we make an investment of
500,000 euros, which is a
cash output and we have a series
of positive cash flows
entries in the next four years,
of 200.000 euros each.
But look, we could put
different amounts.
We will be counting the
cash flow.
Let’s calculate how much all those
future cash flows are worth today,
taking into account the value
of money over time.
And how do we do it?
What we’re going to do is calculate
the cash flow and bring it
to the current moment.
We will bring the 200,000 euros of the
year 4, we will discount them and we will
calculate how much they are worth today.
And we will add the current value
of the 200,000 euros we will receive
within three years, two years,
a year, etc.
We will add it all and we will
calculate what the current value
of all those future cash
flows will be.
What is the formula for this?
very simple though.
It is the same as the one
we have studied the discount, the update.
What happens is that in this case
we will add the different cash
flows so easily.
Let’s look at this example, let’s
see it with a little more of detail
at a numerical level.
We have cash flows that are the investment
of 500,000 and then the charges
we receive in the next
four years.
Here is the formula.
As you can see the discount formula
for cash flows, what we do is
bring those cash flows or discount
them all to the current moment
with a discount factor applying
a discount factor or an
upgrade factor.
This is 10% of what
we have said.
In the first case, we will
divide that investment, the investment,
those 500,000 euros we will
divide by a discount factor.
In this case, the rate is
up to zero.
That is, it’s equal to one,
mathematically it’s equal to
one but good common sense
also tells you because it’s an
investment that we make today.
If you do today the factor, the
value of money in time does not affect.
As we move forward, we
will divide by a larger
amount.
Divide by 1 with 1 elevated
to 1.
We divide between 1 and 1.
If we go to the year 2, we
will divide those 200,000 euros
by a discount factor that
is 1 with 1 elevated to 2
that is equal to 1 with
21.
The current value of those 200,
000 euros when divided between 1
and 21 is 123,000.
We can do this every
year, with all the
cash flow.
If we add the discounted cash
flows of all periods what we
have is the current value or
present value of that cash
flow.
That is, cash flow discount allows
us to calculate the present value or
current value of a series of cash
flows that will be levies and payments
that are given in the future.